---
layout: post
title: Russell's Paradox and Religion
---

Russell's paradox is as follows:

Consider a set S, where all its elements are only sets that do not contain themselves. For example, the empty set would be in S.

If S does not contain itself, then S is a set that does not contain itself. By definition, it must be an element of itself.
If S does contain itself, then it is a set that contains itself. By definition, it cannot be an element of itself.

Trippy, right?

I thought of Russell's paradox after a theological discussion we had at the Chinmaya mission. We defined world as the set
of everything, both tangible (like the earth) and intangible (like emotions). In other words, the world is the realm of our thoughts.
Then we asked: is God part of our world, or is he outside?

We will proceed by contradiction.
Assume God is outside our world. However, we still think of Him. He is in our thoughts, therefore he is in our world.

See how similar this sounds to Russell's paradox?
The other assumption (that God is in our world) doesn't match up quite with the paradox, but I suspect we can reach a similar
standstill if we revise our definition of world.

I think the parallels between theology and set theory are cool because, ultimately, we are all collections of ideas.

Also, they have a similar purpose: to figure out order at a very fundamental level.
Set theory gets at the underpinnings of mathematics. The natural numbers are constructed based on sets.
We were asking ourselves: What is our world? What is a soul? Who am I? These questions get at the heart of who we are, going past what happens on the surface.
